TiDB Quick Start refresh (#19412)
pingcap/docs: quick-start-with-tidb.md

Reviewer: Preview: https://pingcap-docsite-preview-git-preview-pi-d37033-oreoxmts-projects.vercel.app/tidb/dev/quick-start-with-tidb

> 

Reviewer 2: Hi @alastori, thank you for writing this detailed document. It is quite helpful for users to learn how to use the monitoring tools and scale clusters. I’ve tested the steps on my macOS, and while following the instructions, these steps guide me to set up a local cluster four times as follows  😂 , which is time-consuming. 

tiup playground
tiup playground --tag dev-env
tiup playground v8.1.0 --tag sample-app-env --db 2 --kv 3 --pd 1 --tiflash 0
tiup playground v8.1.0 --tag sample-app-env --db 2 --kv 3 --pd 1 --tiflash 0 --tiproxy 1

Would it be possible to provide just one or two cluster setup commands and list the rest as a tip? This could help streamline the setup process for users.

By the way, I’m not sure if introducing the usage of `--tag` is necessary for first-time users, as it makes the command longer. Without introducing `--tag` in this doc, we can avoid concerns about whether users are scaling the correct cluster.

TiDB is a distributed SQL database built for both transactional and analytical workloads. Key features:

- MySQL compatible
- Horizontally scalable
- Real-time HTAP (Hybrid Transactional and Analytical Processing)
- Cloud-native architecture

> **Note:**
>
> - This deployment method is for development and testing only.
> - For the fastest way to get started, try [TiDB Cloud Serverless](https://tidbcloud.com/free-trial) - our fully managed service with a free tier.
> - For production deployments, see [Deploy a TiDB Cluster Using TiUP](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/production-deployment-using-tiup) or [Deploy a TiDB Cluster on Kubernetes](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tidb-in-kubernetes).

## Set up your environment

First, install TiUP, the package manager for TiDB:

```shell
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/install.sh | sh
```

The install script added `tiup` to your shell path. Open a new terminal or reload the shell profile:

<SimpleTab>
<div label="macOS">

For macOS:

```shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

</div>
<div label="Linux">

For Linux:

```shell

> source ~/.bash_profile

Reviewer: > source ~/.bash_profile

The current description is too specific and may mislead users, as shell profile paths can vary across different Linux distributions and shell types. I recommend keeping the original, more flexible instructions:

https://github.com/pingcap/docs/blob/063e85c4ffad4cb3d0592698ca1eca9a16e41955/quick-start-with-tidb.md?plain=1#L59-L67

For example, in the installation output shown below, the shell profile is `/home/codespace/.bashrc`:

```bash
Successfully set mirror to https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com
Detected shell: bash
Shell profile:  /home/codespace/.bashrc
/home/codespace/.bashrc has been modified to add tiup to PATH
open a new terminal or source /home/codespace/.bashrc to use it
Installed path: /home/codespace/.tiup/bin/tiup
===============================================
Have a try:     tiup playground
===============================================
```

> open a new terminal or source /home/codespace/.bashrc to use it

```

</div>
</SimpleTab>

## Start your database

Launch a local TiDB cluster with one command:

```shell
tiup playground
```

TiUP will automatically download the necessary binaries. Wait for the success message:

```log
TiDB Playground Cluster is started, enjoy!
```

Congratulations! You're running a distributed SQL database.

To proceed with the next steps, open another terminal and keep `tiup` running.

## Connect to TiDB

You can connect to TiDB using either the built-in TiUP client or any MySQL-compatible client.

### Using TiUP client

The TiUP client gives you a convenient way to interact with TiDB via the command line.

```shell
tiup client
```

> Select the endpoint to connect, and try your first commands:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Press Enter to connect to the endpoint, and try your first commands:
```

Reviewer 2: Reason: It seems that pressing ↑ or ↓ is not working to switch the endpoint does not work. Users have to press Enter to connect to the default endpoint. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f97ceb55-3e5e-4f0a-a554-80fe5e0652e2)

```sql
CREATE DATABASE hello;
USE hello;

CREATE TABLE hello_tidb (
     id   INT,
     name VARCHAR(50)
  );

INSERT INTO hello_tidb VALUES
    (1, 'Hello World');

SELECT * FROM hello_tidb;
```

> You should see this output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output is as follows:
```

> should, should be [link](https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#should)
Generally avoid.
Because should is ambiguous by definition, it can be problematic.
"If an outcome is expected: Describe the outcome in terms of what is expected. For example: "The process returns 10 items."

https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#should

```
SELECT * FROM hello_tidb;
+----+-------------+
| id | name        |
+----+-------------+
|  1 | Hello World |
+----+-------------+
(1 row)
```

To exit the client, type `exit` or simply `\q`.

### Using standard MySQL client

You can install the standard MySQL client with:

<SimpleTab>
<div label="macOS">

macOS:

> {{< copyable "sql-regular" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> macOS:
> {{< copyable "sql-regular" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
macOS:

```

```shell
brew install mysql-client
```

</div>
<div label="Linux">

Linux (Debian/Ubuntu):

```shell
sudo apt install mysql-client
```

Linux (RHEL/CentOS):

```shell
sudo yum install mysql
```

> </div>

Reviewer 3: Fenced code blocks should be surrounded by blank lines.
```suggestion

</div>
```

</SimpleTab>

Check if the MySQL client is installed:

```shell
mysql --version
```

You should see an output indicating the MySQL client version number.

> If you already have the MySQL client installed, you can connect to TiDB with:
> 

Reviewer 3: Do not use multiple consecutive blank lines (line 155~156). Instead, one blank line is enough.
```suggestion
If you already have the MySQL client installed, you can connect to TiDB with:
```

```shell
mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 4000 -u root
```

## Understanding what just happened

You just started to use a fully functional distributed database cluster with:

- **TiDB Server:** SQL layer that processes queries and speaks MySQL protocol
- **TiKV:** Distributed storage layer that replicates data automatically and handles transactions across nodes
- **PD (Placement Driver):** Cluster orchestrator that works behind the scenes to coordinate TiDB, TiKV, and TiFlash components, managing cluster metadata and ensuring data is distributed optimally

Additionally, `tiup playground` installed optional components:

- **TiFlash:** Real-time analytics engine that accelerates complex queries and reporting without slowing down your live application
- Built-in **monitoring stack** with:

>   - TiDB Dashboard (default: http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard, user: `root`, no password)

Reviewer 3: - Please use four-space indentation in unordered lists.
- Do not use bare URLs.
```suggestion
    - TiDB Dashboard (default: <http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard>, user: `root`, no password)
```

>   - Grafana + Prometheus (default: http://127.0.0.1:3000, user: `admin`, password: `admin`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Grafana + Prometheus (default: <http://127.0.0.1:3000>, user: `admin`, password: `admin`)
```

You can verify your running database cluster components with:

```shell

> tiup playground display

Reviewer 2: Could we instruct users to run this command before introducing the components? Then, users will see the following output in their terminal first and see the explanations of these components in our document. 

```
A new version of playground is available: v1.14.1 -> v1.16.1

    To update this component:   tiup update playground
    To update all components:   tiup update --all

Pid    Role     Uptime
---    ----     ------
18997  pd       50m54.278572s
19089  tikv     50m6.9280185s
19353  tidb     47m42.160680084s
20593  tiflash  36m26.515627792s
```

```

## Developer workflow

> The previous steps gave you an ephemeral environment - perfect for first experiments but everything is lost when you stop the playground. Let's set up a more suitable environment for development.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The previous steps gave you an ephemeral environment - perfect for first experiments but everything is lost when you stop the playground. You can set up a more suitable environment for development.
```

### Persistent playground environments

Create a tagged playground that persists data between restarts:

```shell
tiup playground --tag dev-env
```

The `--tag` flag preserves your data after the playground environment restarts, and lets you run multiple environments using different tags (e.g., `dev-env`, `sample-app-env`).

> Tags also makes cleanup explicit with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Tip:**
> Tags also make cleanup explicit with `tiup clean dev-env`.
```

> Tags also makes cleanup explicit with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tags also make cleanup explicit with:
```

> ```shell
> tiup clean dev-env
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ```shell
> tiup clean dev-env
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: reason: Move this command to the Tip section (https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/19412/files#r1863110475), as it doesn’t need to be executed at this point.

```shell
tiup playground v8.1.0 --tag sample-app-env --db 2 --kv 3 --pd 1 --tiflash 0
```

TiUP will download the necessary binaries for the specified version and start the cluster components for you.

### Manage your playground environments

You can list all your playground environments with:

```shell
tiup status
```

You will see an output similar to this:

```log
Name            Component  PID    Status  ... Args
sample-app-env  playground 30661  RUNNING ... tiup-playground v8.1.0 --tag sample-app-env --db 2 --kv 3 --pd 1 --tiflash 0
```

If you stop a tagged playground cluster by pressing <kbd>Ctrl+C</kbd> in the terminal where you started it, you can start it again without losing data.

To restart the environment, you can run `tiup playground` with the same arguments as in the `tiup status` output, as seen in the output above, or you can change them. This means that you have the flexibility to add and remove cluster components.

> To add a TiProxy instance as a load balancer to your existing `sample-app-env` environment with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To add a TiProxy (a load balancer for TiDB) instance to your existing `sample-app-env` environment with:
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Remove an extra blank line.
```suggestion
```

```shell

> tiup playground v8.1.0 --tag sample-app-env --db 2 --kv 3 --pd 1 --tiflash 0 --tiproxy 1

Reviewer 2: Every time I execute this command, I encounter the following error. However, if I clean up the existing `sample-app-env` using `tiup clean sample-app-env` and then re-execute the command, it works fine. Therefore, I’m unsure if adding TiProxy to an existing cluster this way is correct.
```
Start pd instance: v8.1.0
Start tikv instance: v8.1.0
Start tikv instance: v8.1.0
Start tikv instance: v8.1.0
Start tidb instance: v8.1.0
Start tidb instance: v8.1.0
Start tiproxy instance: v1.3.0
Waiting for tidb and tiproxy instances ready
127.0.0.1:62346 ... Error
127.0.0.1:62348 ... Error
```

```

You should see the cluster starting normally, with an output like this:

```log
TiDB Playground Cluster is started, enjoy!
Connect TiDB: mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 4001 -u root
Connect TiDB: mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 4000 -u root

> Connect TiProxy: mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 6000 -u root

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Connect TiProxy: mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 6000 -u root
TiDB Dashboard:  http://127.0.0.1:60434/dashboard
Grafana:         http://127.0.0.1:60838
```

Reviewer 2: reason: We can instruct users to note the Dashboard link as it will be used in "TiDB Dashboard: SQL insights" to check "weather data queries"

```

Now you can connect through TiProxy:

> 

Reviewer 3: Remove an extra blank line.
```suggestion
```

```shell
mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 6000 -u root
```

> See all TiUP playground options with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open a new terminal, and then see all TiUP playground options with:
```

Reviewer 2: reason: Avoid users closing the terminal with the Proxy connection so they can proceed with the steps in "Sample scalable database application".

> 

Reviewer 3: Remove an extra blank line.
```suggestion
```

    (station_id, temperature, humidity, pressure) SELECT id as station_id, ROUND(10 + (RAND() *
    30), 1), ROUND(40 + (RAND() * 60)), ROUND(980 + (RAND() * 40)) FROM stations;"
    sleep 0.5
done
```

Terminal 2: Read Workload

Run this command to continuously query the data:

```shell
while true; do
    mysql -h 127.0.0.1 -P 6000 -u root -D sample_weather -e "SELECT s.name, s.location,
    r.temperature, r.humidity, r.recorded_at FROM stations s JOIN readings r ON s.id = r.station_id
    WHERE r.recorded_at >= NOW() - INTERVAL 5 MINUTE ORDER BY r.recorded_at DESC LIMIT 5;"
    sleep 1
    mysql -h 127.0.0.1 -P 6000 -u root -D sample_weather -e "SELECT s.name,
    ROUND(AVG(r.temperature), 1) as avg_temp, ROUND(AVG(r.humidity)) as avg_humidity,
    COUNT(*) as num_readings FROM stations s JOIN readings r ON s.id = r.station_id WHERE
    r.recorded_at >= NOW() - INTERVAL 1 HOUR GROUP BY s.id, s.name ORDER BY avg_temp DESC;"
    sleep 3
done
```

## Monitor your application

Now that you have a running application with active read and write workloads, let's use TiDB's built-in monitoring tools to understand what's happening.

### TiDB Dashboard: SQL insights

> Access TiDB Dashboard by checking its URL on the terminal you are running TiUP playground (typically http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard - user: `root`, no password) to:

Reviewer 2: "http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard" is confusing here because this section assumes TiProxy is added. In that case, "http://127.0.0.1:60434/dashboard/" is also typical.
```suggestion
Access TiDB Dashboard by using its URL (for example, http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard) in the terminal where you are running TiUP playground. The default login is root with no password.
```

1. View your running queries:

>     - Go to "SQL Statements" to see your weather data queries

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Go to **SQL Statements** to see your weather data queries
```

>     - Check execution times, and additional optional columns, and click on the statement for more execution details

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Check execution times, and additional optional columns, and click the statement for more execution details
```

>     - Go to "Slow Queries" to identify queries that might need optimization

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Go to **Slow Queries** to identify queries that might need optimization
```

2. Monitor instance status:

    - Check "Overview" and "Cluster Info" for general topology, and resource usage
    - Check "Monitoring" to see the database load and other relevant metrics
    - Check "Search Logs" for any query errors

### Grafana: system performance

> Access Grafana by checking its URL on the terminal you are running TiUP playground (typically http://127.0.0.1:3000 - user: `admin`, password: `admin`). Change the password or Skip. You can visualize the built-in dashboards by clicking on the Search icon and the folder "Test-Cluster":

Reviewer 2: "typically http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard" is confusing here because this section assumes TiProxy is added. In that case, " http://127.0.0.1:60838" is also typical.

1. Detailed TiDB metrics:

    Search for "Overview", for general cluster health status

2. TiProxy Load Balancing:

    Search for "TiProxy", and check the "Balance" row

> **Tip:**
>
> Keep these monitoring pages open while experimenting with different data volumes or query patterns to understand how your application behaves under load.

> ## Scaling your cluster

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Scale your cluster
```

As your weather monitoring system grows, you'll need to handle more stations, readings, and queries. Let's scale the cluster while observing the process in real-time.

### Prepare monitoring views

Before scaling, set up these monitoring views to watch the scaling process:

> 1. Open TiDB Dashboard (typically http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Open TiDB Dashboard (typically <http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard>):
```

    Go to "Cluster Info", "Store Topology"

> 2. Open Grafana (typically http://127.0.0.1:3000):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Open Grafana (typically <http://127.0.0.1:3000>):
```

    - Find "TiKV-Summary" dashboard
    - Look for the "Cluster" panel:
        - Store, Available, and Capacity size charts

### Add storage capacity (TiKV)

With monitoring in place, let's add two additional TiKV nodes (scale-out). Open a new terminal and run:

```shell
tiup playground scale-out --kv 2
```

Watch the expansion:

- In TiDB Dashboard, refresh the "Cluster Info", "Store Topology". You should see the new TiKV nodes in the topology
- In Grafana, watch TiKV size increase
- In your application terminals, verify continuous data ingestion without any disruption

### Remove storage capacity (TiKV)

> Let's remove one TiKV node. For these scale-in operations, we specify the exact node we want to remove using its PID. First, in your available terminal, check the TiKV nodes PIDs:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Remove one TiKV node. For these scale-in operations, you can specify the exact node you want to remove using its PID. First, in your available terminal, check the TiKV nodes PIDs:
```

```shell
tiup playground display
```

> You should see something similar to:
> ```shell

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You should see something similar to:

```shell
```

Pid     Role    Uptime
...
51456   tikv    9m43.93267625s
...
```

> You can scale-in your cluster by removing one TiKV node of your choice using its PID. For example, run the following replacing the `--pid` value with your `tikv` PID:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can scale-in your cluster by removing one TiKV node of your choice using its PID. For example, run the following to replace the `--pid` value with your `tikv` PID:
```

```shell
tiup playground scale-in --pid 51464
```

### Scale query processing (TiDB)

Now that storage is expanded, let's add TiDB nodes while watching query distribution:

```shell
tiup playground scale-out --db 1
```

Watch the query layer scaling:

- TiDB Dashboard, "Cluster Info", "Instances". Check the new TiDB instance

> - Grafana, search for "TiProxy-Summary", and expand the "Query Summary" or "Traffic". You should see a new instance in the backend and the traffic is being balanced across them

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Grafana, search for "TiProxy-Summary", and expand the "Query Summary" or "Traffic". You can see a new instance in the backend and the traffic is being balanced across them
```
